Question: I take famotidine for acid indigestion and I'm taking drops for glaucoma. I have heard
that famotidine may contribute to glaucoma and want to know if this is true.
Answer: While it is unlikely that famotidine is definitively related to glaucoma, it does fall in the
class of antihistamines (H2 Blocker) that may raise the risk of acute angle closure
glaucoma for some people with narrow angles.
With glaucoma, each person's risk profile is unique, so it's best to discuss your
medications with your ophthalmologist.. They can help determine which of your
medications you can safely take and the ones you should avoid.

Question: How does using antihistamines affect my glaucoma?
Answer: Antihistamines can cause an angle closure glaucoma attack (when fluid is completely
blocked from leaving the eye, causing a dangerous rise in pressure) in some patients
who have narrow angles. You should check with your ophthalmologist to learn what type
of glaucoma you have and whether antihistamine usage could cause this problem.

Question: What can I take for sea sickness if I have narrow angle glaucoma but have had an
iridotomy?
Answer: The type of medication taken for motion sickness can make your pupils dilate, which can
then raise the risk of a sudden increase in eye pressure (acute angle closure) and
possible vision loss. An iridotomy (a small opening in the iris usually made by a laser)
can be done to either bring the eye pressure back down, or to decrease the likelihood of
this happening in those who are felt to be at increased risk.
However, having an iridotomy does not completely eliminate the risk which varies from
person to person, so it is important to discuss this with your ophthalmologist who can
examine your eyes and advise you on whether taking motion sickness medications is
safe in your particular situation.
Unfortunately I'm not aware of any other types of medication for motion sickness, and
medication alternatives like acupressure wristbands have not been clearly shown to be
effective.

Question: I am using timolol eye drops and I might have myasthenia gravis—is it safe to use them?
Answer: Systemic beta blockers are generally not preferred in patients with myasthenia gravis (a
disorder that causes muscles to weaken and tire easily). They can cause fatigue but the
effect varies and is dependent on the type and dose. No information is available on
topical beta blockers (such as timolol eye drops) in myasthenia gravis.
If you take beta blockers to manage your glaucoma, it’s important to apply pressure on
the inner eyelids near the nose (called punctal occlusion) for 5 minutes after inserting the
drops to reduce absorption into the rest of the body.
If you notice that using the drops causes fatigue or worsens your symptoms, then
consult your ophthalmologist who may recommend stopping the drops to see if the
symptoms go away. You can then restart the beta blockers and see if symptoms worsen
again. If you determine that beta blocker drops do, in fact, worsens your myasthenia
gravis symptoms or cause fatigue you may then ask your ophthalmologist to choose
different options for your glaucoma treatment

Question: Can a corneal implant correct normal pressure glaucoma?
Answer: Corneal transplant surgery (which I assume you mean by "implant") is done for a variety
of reasons; unfortunately, glaucoma is not one of them. In fact, a possible complication
of corneal transplants is increased eye pressure. As a result, some people with
glaucoma may have more problems with their glaucoma or their transplants following
surgery. Cornea and glaucoma specialists know to monitor for these problems, and both
are typically involved in the management of such complicated cases.


Question: Can supplements help glaucoma?
Answer: There is no strong evidence at this time that either vitamin or non-vitamin supplements
can help glaucoma, however this is an area of ongoing research. A healthy, nutrient-rich
diet can lower your risk for certain eye diseases, however. It is important to talk to your
ophthalmologist and/or primary care provider about the possible risks before taking any
supplement.


Question: Can I have LASIK if I am a glaucoma suspect?
Answer: Given otherwise healthy eyes this should not be a problem. Modern-day LASIK does not
raise eye pressure much and it only does so for 15 to 20 seconds at most.


Question: My partner who has Alzheimer’s and does not want to take her glaucoma drops twice a
day. Can you combine two medications to lessen the aggravation of putting the drops in
morning and night?
Answer: Some glaucoma drops are available in a combined form, however most of these are not
available as generics. Some accredited compounding pharmacies offer combined forms
of two or even three different drops for easier dosing. There is also a newer drug that is
implanted in the eye, effectively taking the place of an eye drop for at least a few
months. Finally, there are a variety of procedures that can lower the eye pressure and
reduce, or sometimes even eliminate, the need for drops. All of these options have their
relative advantages and disadvantages. I would recommend discussing this issue further
with your partner's ophthalmologist.


Question: When I do visual field testing, it causes neck pain due to an old injury. Is there a shorter
version or a different test which would be less painful?
Answer: There are shorter test versions that can be performed on some visual field machines,
however in certain situations the longer test versions may be necessary. In either case,
good positioning is important: you should be seated comfortably with your back straight
and at the appropriate height for the test bowl, meaning you should not have to slump to
reach the chin rest or stretch to reach the forehead rest. You should discuss this problem
with your eye care provider.


Question: Is it safe to use a SAD light therapy lamp for insomnia with glaucoma, fibromyalgia and
chronic fatigue syndrome? It’s been suggested as part of "Sleep Restriction Therapy" for
insomnia where avoiding sleep is more likely to induce sleep.
Answer: I cannot comment on the effectiveness of lights for seasonal affective disorder (SAD) or
insomnia. But I do not think it is unsafe to use these treatments, and if you feel they are
helpful for your condition it is likely safe to use.


Question: What is eye pressure?
Answer: The eye is a closed ball filled with clear jelly (vitreous humor) in the back behind the lens
and clear fluid (aqueous humor) in the front, between the iris and the cornea. Aqueous
humor is created just behind the iris and is in continuous circulation throughout the front
part of the eye before it drains out just in front of the iris where it meets the cornea. This
fluid helps keep the eye "inflated" just like air inside a balloon.
We can measure pressure of the eye just like you can gauge how full a balloon is by
poking the balloon with your finger. The less air or pressure in the balloon, the easier it
will be to poke and conversely, the more air or pressure in the balloon, the stiffer the
balloon will be and the harder it will be to poke it. We measure pressure in the eye the
same way; by gently touching the cornea with special instruments to see how hard it is
to "poke." The unit of measurement is millimeters of mercury, or mmHg.
Pressure in the human eye, known as intraocular pressure, varies throughout the day
with "normal" pressure being anywhere between 10 and 21 mmHg. Glaucoma is an eye
disease in which the optic nerve is damaged by the pressure inside the eye. In most
cases, the damaging pressure is greater than 21 mmHg, but there are some patients
who can have damage at lower pressures (known as normotensive glaucoma).
Conversely, there are some people who can tolerate higher-than-normal pressures
without having optic nerve damage. These people are said to have "ocular
hypertension". Eye pressure can vary with the thickness of the cornea—this is also
measured when trying to interpret the significance of an eye pressure—reading in any
one patient.
In addition to high pressure, risk factors for glaucoma include African or Hispanic
ancestry, having diabetes and having a family member with glaucoma. Glaucoma does
not typically cause pain and many cases of glaucoma go undiagnosed. Checking eye
pressure is an important part of a comprehensive eye exam and one good reason to get
regular check-ups by your ophthalmologist or eye care provider.


Question: I've recently been diagnosed with pigment dispersion syndrome and ocular
hypertension. Is it still safe for me to get LASIK?
Answer: Neither pigment dispersion syndrome or ocular hypertension should have any effect on
having successful LASIK surgery. But both should be evaluated by your eye surgeon
before you have LASIK.


Question: What drops do you recommend to relieve the sting of glaucoma eye drops?
Answer: We usually recommend using a lubricant eye drop (standard, not gel which would be too
thick) 10 to 15 minutes before using your glaucoma drops. This may relieve the stinging
sensation, which is often due to dry eye. Cold is also an effective anesthetic (pain killer).
So consider keeping the lubricant eye drops in the refrigerator for additional relief from
the temporary stinging, burning and itching.


Question: I'm at risk for glaucoma and my doctor considers me a "glaucoma suspect." Can I still get my
yearly exam during this COVID pandemic?
Answer: A person is a glaucoma suspect when they have risk factors for glaucoma, like high
intraocular pressure (IOP).
At this point in the pandemic, our office asks that patients postpone routine in-office visits for
this type of annual monitoring/maintenance. In this time of social distancing, for your
protection and the protection of our more vulnerable patients who must come in for urgent
visits, we are aggressively trying to limit patient flow through our offices. The best thing to do
is call your ophthalmologist who can provide guidance for you.


Question: My wife has chronic cough caused by her glaucoma eye drops. She stopped taking the
drops for a couple weeks, and also switched drops three times, but each time the
coughing returns. She had one laser surgery that didn't work. What else can she do?
Answer: At this point, it sounds like conservative measures have been exhausted. Ask your
ophthalmologist about the different surgical alternatives that may help manage your
wife’s glaucoma.


Question: Does increased IOP cause the eyeball to feel hardened? If so, is a person able to tell if
their IOP is high by how firm or soft their eyeball feels?
Answer: The eye pressure typically must be very high for the eye to feel “hard.” Touching
(palpating) the eyeball through the eyelid is called a “tactile” pressure and is not a very
accurate way of determining eye pressure. You should never directly touch the surface
of your eyeball because this can cause injury and infection. Most patients and physicians
are not able to accurately determine the eye pressure by touching (palpating) the eye, so
it always is best to see your ophthalmologist regularly to have your eye pressure
accurately measured.


Question: Should patients with severe glaucoma allow their eyes to be dilated during exam? Are
there risks?
Answer: For patients with severe peripheral vision loss due to open angle glaucoma, there is
usually little risk from being dilated for an exam. Some patients with open angle
glaucoma will have a pressure spike (high intraocular pressure) after dilation, so your
ophthalmologist should occasionally check your eye pressure after you have been
dilated to see if your eye pressure rises. Patients who are found to “spike” with dilation
can be given pressure lowering drops before dilation to prevent the spike. This is
particularly important for patients who require frequent dilation, such as those seeing a
retina specialist for macular degeneration or diabetic retinopathy.
Dilation is more risky in patients who have a narrow angle, where the iris (colored part of
the eye) is very close to the cornea (clear window at the front of the eye). Dilating drops
can raise pressure in these patients by closing off the drainage angle of the eye. If your
narrow angle poses such a risk, your ophthalmologist will usually perform a laser
peripheral iridotomy, which makes a microscopic hole in the iris so the pressure will not
go up when the eye is dilated. Cataract surgery also “cures” this condition. In summary,
your ophthalmologist will know whether your eye is safe to be dilated after the initial
exam.


Question: Does an ophthalmologist perform the same tests for glaucoma and myasthenia gravis?
Answer: There is no overlap in testing for glaucoma and myasthenia gravis. Glaucoma is a
disease related to intraocular pressure and the ensuing damage to the optic nerve in the
back of the eye. Myasthenia gravis is a disease that can affect the muscles controlling
the eyes and eyelid movement. These are different diseases that require different
testing.


Question: Can you tell me what treatment is recommended for pseudoexfoliation glaucoma? Is
there anything a patient can do to help the situation?
Answer: Similar to other types of glaucoma, the goal with pseudoexfoliation glaucoma (when
flaky dandruff-like deposits inside the eye block fluid from leaving the eye, causing
pressure to rise) is to reduce eye pressure to prevent additional damage to the optic
nerve.
Typically, we first try topical eye drops to reduce eye pressure. Patients with
pseudoexfoliation glaucoma that is mild to moderate also tend to respond particularly
well to selective laser trabeculoplasty, which is a low-risk, in-office procedure.
There are also some minimally invasive glaucoma surgery options for mild to moderate
pseudoexfoliation glaucoma, such as iStent, trabectome, or endoscopic
cyclophotocoagulation. If the glaucoma is more advanced or the patient needs
significant eye pressure lowering, more traditional glaucoma surgery such as
trabeculectomy or aqueous shunt implant is recommended.
The best thing a patient with pseudoexfoliation glaucoma can do is to live a generally
healthy lifestyle with good diet and exercise, be diligent about following their
ophthalmologist's instructions for using medications, and returning for regular follow-up
with their ophthalmologist so any changes in the glaucoma or eye pressure can be noted
right away.
Finally, it is important to note that some patients with pseudoexfoliation also have narrow
angles (when the colored part of your eye is pushed too far forward), which can put you
at risk for angle closure attacks of elevated eye pressure. Everyone with
pseudoexfoliation should be evaluated by their ophthalmologist for narrow angle.


Question: Is it safe for a person who takes eye drops for glaucoma to use nasal sprays such as
Nasacort?
Answer: Nasacort is a steroid and it is certainly possible to have steroid-associated intraocular
pressure elevations from nasal steroids. Fortunately, most patients will not have an
associated pressure rise. However, whenever a nasal steroid is introduced in a patient
with glaucoma, or at higher risk for developing glaucoma, monitoring by an
ophthalmologist is warranted.


Question: I’ve had nummular keratitis for three years and am wondering how long it persists. I can't
stop prednisolone because it recurs. I’m a steroid responder and now I have cataract as
well. What other options do I have?
Answer: Nummular keratitis describes a pattern of corneal inflammation that is usually caused by
a virus like varicella zoster, which causes chicken pox/shingles, or adenovirus, which
causes conjunctivitis (pink eye).
The treatment is steroid eye drops, but occasionally it can be difficult to taper them off
without the inflammation coming back. Sometimes this is due to the steroids being
tapered too early or too quickly. In these cases, I prefer not to start the steroid taper until
a few weeks after I feel the inflammation is completely resolved. With each recurrence, I
also extend the steroid a bit longer, sometimes waiting a few weeks before tapering to
the next step.
Once someone is down to one steroid drop a day, I may further taper the steroid to every
other day, every third day, or every week. If a patient is taking a strong steroid such as
difluprenate, I always switch to a weaker strength steroid before stopping. If all of these
strategies do not work, I have also tried another anti-inflammatory drop cyclosporin
off-label with occasional success.
However, even if you need to stay on steroids for successful treatment, that is okay.
Inflammation control is always the first priority. Steroids can cause the eye pressure to
go up and can also cause cataracts. But elevated eye pressure can be treated, and
cataracts can be removed, but inadequately controlled inflammation can lead to more
significant consequences.


Question: Does caffeine affect glaucoma, and should I limit my intake?
Answer: There may be a small effect of increased intraocular pressure with caffeine consumption.
However, there is no evidence that this effect is clinically significant. I would say go
ahead and enjoy your coffee, tea or energy drink—always with an “eye” toward
reasonable moderation, as in all things.


Question: I am a registered nurse and aromatherapist. A client has asked me if there are essential
oils used to treat glaucoma (hers is chronic narrow-angle). I wanted to tell her that
essential oils can’t treat this type of underlying disease—isn’t that correct?
Answer: I don’t know of any data supporting the use of essential oils to treat glaucoma. Please
urge your client to see an ophthalmologist to treat their glaucoma.


Question: I am experiencing severe dizziness after being changed to Combigan eye drops twice a day.
Is this a side effect of this medication?
Answer: This can be a side effect of either or both of the components of Combigan. Please let the
prescribing ophthalmologist know of your symptoms. He or she may consider replacing
Combigan with an alternate treatment.


Question: Can cataract surgery be a successful treatment for early-stage narrow angle glaucoma
instead of iridotomy? If pressure in both eyes are high normal, could the thinner lens
improve fluid outflow?
Answer: Cataract surgery will deepen the anterior chamber and usually relieve the narrow angle
issues. This thinner lens has nothing to do with outflow, but if the removal of the cataract
reopens the trabecular meshwork for outflow, the pressure should improve. Sometimes
there are permanent changes to outflow that still may require medication and/or surgery.


Question: Will cataract surgery reduce IOP for narrow angle glaucoma patients?
Answer: If there is high pressure prior to surgery, this often must be taken care of prior to cataract
surgery. In most cases the high pressure of narrow angle glaucoma is related to the
aging and increasing size of your cataract, which is the lens of your eye that has gotten
cloudier. Once the lens or cataract is removed, the front chamber of the eye should no
longer be narrow. Many patients with this issue have better pressures after cataract
surgery and may get off drops they were taking for the pressure caused by the crowded
front chamber of the eye.


Question: Would salt in my diet increase my eye pressure?
Answer: Only indirectly. High salt intake will increase your blood pressure. Since the aqueous humor
that determines intraocular pressure empties into the blood vessels, it is possible for
temporary increases in blood pressure to also increase your eye pressure.


Question: Can injectable testosterone elevate eye pressure?
Answer: Although there are no known published reports in the peer reviewed journals of elevated IOP
associated with testosterone injections, this potential side effect has been listed in the FDA’s
prescribing information for testosterone.
The American Academy of Ophthalmology recommends that anyone who has not had a
complete baseline exam by 40 years of age should do so, or if there are any new signs or
symptoms they should obtain an exam as soon as possible. Initiation of testosterone
treatment further reinforces the need to obtain a timely baseline ophthalmic examination by
an ophthalmologist.


Question: I have a higher than normal optic disc C/D ratio (a measurement of the optic disc in the
back of the eye that helps ophthalmologists assess glaucoma risks and development).
Would having LASIK or SMILE (refractive surgery to reduce dependence on glasses)
possibly make it difficult for an ophthalmologist to detect glaucoma in my eyes in the
future?
Answer: If you do not have glaucoma at this time, there really should be no increased risk to the
surgery itself. There are established methods for calculating eye pressure after LASIK
surgery. However, glaucoma today is mostly diagnosed with visual field testing and
imaging of the nerve fiber layer of the back of the eye which are unchanged by these
refractive surgery procedures.


Question: Is it safe to have blepharoplasty if you have narrow angles? Intraocular pressures are low.
Answer: Yes. Narrow angle glaucoma, or glaucoma in general, is not a contraindication to
blepharoplasty surgery.


Question: I have been diagnosed with narrow angle glaucoma and it has been suggested I have
laser iridotomy. With this type of eye condition would I be able to have LASIK eye
correction?
Answer: Narrow angle glaucoma, if untreated can lead to a sudden attack of acute-angle
glaucoma associated with elevated intraocular pressure and pain. Acute-angle glaucoma
is an ocular emergency. If not treated in a timely manner, it can lead to some permanent
vision loss. It is very important that if your ophthalmologist has recommended iridotomy
that you follow up on the recommendation soon. LASIK is a different kind of laser
surgery that involves reshaping the cornea, located at the front of the eye, to reduce
dependence on contact lenses or glasses to see. In general, the factors that would lead
to iridotomy or lead to LASIK are independent of each other and quite different. Often,
these scenarios can be more complex. For example, some patients who present with
narrow angles may also have cataracts. In that case, rather than LASIK, cataract
removal surgery might better address that situation. Each eye is unique. You should
speak to your ophthalmologist to have a better understanding of the risks and benefits of
any eye procedure. An ophthalmologist can present your options and explain the best
intervention for you.


Question: My father has glaucoma. He wasn’t born with it, he just discovered it 10 years ago. Is that
still considered hereditary? Am I at risk of it?
Answer: A family history of glaucoma, whether present at birth or acquired later in life, is a risk factor
for glaucoma. It is important for you to have regular eye exams, and to convey your family
history to your ophthalmologist.


Question: My wife was recently diagnosed with pigment dispersion syndrome (or PDS, when
pigment cells detach from the iris and float inside the eye). It's been caught early on and
her pressure levels are all normal. However, the diagnosis has left her rather depressed
as she is an avid exerciser and cares about the appearance of her eyes. Over time will
PDS cause her eyes to change color drastically to where they are noticeably different
colors?
Answer: PDS usually does not cause a noticeable change in eye color. The pigment released in
this syndrome is from a tissue layer on the back of the iris, which is liberated when it
rubs against the front surface of the lens. Happily, this tissue layer is not the source of
one’s eye color. So, while in rare instances, so much pigment is released into the eye
that the iris can take on a slightly brown tinge, this is really quite infrequent and should
not be a concern.


Question: How long has OCT scanning been used in ophthalmology?
Answer: Optical Coherence Tomography, or OCT, is a new powerful tool for the diagnosis and
treatment of retinal disease, glaucoma, and optic atrophy. OCT has been used as a research
tool for about 20 years. It provides the ophthalmologist with beautiful images of the retina
and optic nerve, requires no radiation (as CAT scan does) or injection of dye (as in
fluorescein angiography), and can be used safely in people with cardiac
pacemakers/defibrillators and hearing implants. It takes only minutes to perform. Over the
last decade, retinal specialists have been using OCT to diagnose macular holes, epiretinal
membrane (macular pucker), macular degeneration, central serous retinopathy, cystoid
macular degeneration, and other retinal diseases. Glaucoma is a painless, symptomless
condition that can cause blindness. OCT is very useful for measuring retinal nerve fiber layer
and evaluating the optic nerve. With OCT, ophthalmologists can determine the severity of
damage from glaucoma and monitor treatment.


Question: Could getting 3% hydrogen peroxide in my eye lead to glaucoma?
Answer: The common 3% hydrogen peroxide solution rarely causes permanent or severe eye
damage. Glaucoma is not one of the problems one would suspect from getting this into
the eye. Damage of this sort from hydrogen peroxide solution is typically limited to the
cornea, on the surface of the eye, where it can produce cause stinging, pain, redness,
tearing, and even corneal abrasion (scratch) and ulceration (open sore).
Corneal abrasions and ulcers can be serious if not treated by an ophthalmologist. As
with most eye exposure to chemicals, it is wise to flush the eye with water immediately
and continue doing so until you know the offending chemical has been flushed from the
eye. It would be wise to see your ophthalmologist after you have finished the flush.


Question: I am thinking of getting eyelash extensions, but I have been diagnosed with glaucoma. Is
it safe to get these extensions?
Answer: This is an interesting question. Eyelash extensions involve “gluing” extensions onto
existing eyelashes. This won’t affect your glaucoma. However, keep in mind that if you
have been diagnosed with glaucoma, some drops used to treat glaucoma can cause
eyelash growth over time, which may eliminate the need for eyelash extensions. Check
with your ophthalmologist about this.


Question: Can symptoms from Fuchs' dystrophy (a condition that harms the inner layer of the cornea)
be confused with symptoms of glaucoma, for example those caused by corneal edema?
Answer: Fuchs' endothelial dystrophy and glaucoma (a disease that increases pressure in the eye)
can have overlapping signs and symptoms that can make them difficult to distinguish. The
hallmark sign of Fuchs' is dysfunction of the corneal endothelium and edema (swelling) in all
layers of the cornea. Occasionally in glaucoma, patients can get edema in the corneal
epithelium, typically when there is a very acute elevation in intraocular pressure. Over time,
the cornea adapts to the elevation in eye pressure and the edema resolves.
Glaucoma and Fuchs' can have overlapping symptoms including blurred vision, light
sensitivity, glare, and halos. A thorough slit lamp evaluation looking for corneal guttae
(damaged corneal cells) in Fuchs' or optic nerve changes in glaucoma, as well as diagnostic
tests such as specular microscopy can aid your ophthalmologist in differentiating between
the two conditions.


Question: Is it advisable to have an IOL inserted if you also have glaucoma and use Cosopt drops?
Answer: Yes—you should still have an IOL. There is hardly ever a situation where an intraocular lens
(IOL) would not be advisable for cataract surgery.


Question: How is a "target" IOP determined?
Answer: The determination of target pressure is based upon several factors. These include the
baseline pressure or the pressures where someone has previously experienced
glaucoma damage, the extent of damage to the optic nerve, as well as other
predisposing factors that may affect an individual’s susceptibility to damage.


Question: What is the incidence of retinal tear or detachment after a sudden onset of PVD following an
iridotomy?
Answer: The incidence of retinal detachment after an iridotomy is quite low. Studies I’ve seen suggest
rates of less than one percent. I’ve not seen studies that effectively quantify the frequency of
retinal tears following laser iridotomy, but I’d suspect that most retinal events that do occur
are coincidental.


Question: Does having posterior vitreous detachment lead/contribute to open-angle glaucoma?
Answer: A posterior vitreous detachment (when the vitreous gel that fills the eye liquefies and
collapses as we age) has not b


Question: What is your opinion of the Trabectome surgical device for the treatment of open-angle
glaucoma?
Answer: There are many newer surgical approaches that are being evaluated for the treatment of
glaucoma, some of which have been approved for use in the United States. The
Trabectome is one of the approved methods in the United States. Unfortunately, both
with established and newer surgical methods there are always some associated risks
and variation in benefits to individual patients. With that in mind, many factors have to be
considered by your ophthalmologist, when determining the best treatment, including the
type of glaucoma, the state of the disease, and the ocular anatomy, in addition to
general health considerations. What is most important is that you work closely with your
ophthalmologist to make sure that your glaucoma is appropriately managed, as
untreated glaucoma can lead to permanent vision loss.


Question: My father in-law has closed-angle glaucoma. He has had drops and laser surgery. He
doesn't see at all out of the affected eye. Would any new surgery give him back his sight
in that eye? Would it repair the optic nerve? Or would it just stop further damage to that
eye?
Answer: Unfortunately, at the present time we are unable to restore an optic nerve. Newer
surgeries can effectively reduce pressures with lower risk, but once an optic nerve has
been damaged, with today's technology the accompanying vision loss is permanent.


Question: At what stage of glaucoma is surgery the only option for controlling eye pressure?
Answer: There are many types of glaucoma. Our assumption is this question is referring to the
most common type of glaucoma, primary open-angle glaucoma, which can present in
various stages. In managing primary open-angle glaucoma there are many factors to
consider in choosing an intervention, including the stage of the disease and apparent
rate of progression as well as the more global issues of age, health status, and life
expectancy. That is why an ophthalmologist—a physician trained in diseases affecting
the entire body as well as diseases of the eye—is best trained to help.
In general, we try to minimize and delay—when safe—exposure to interventional risk.
That is, we choose a treatment that is most likely to minimize adverse effects in the short
term while preserving vision over the short- and long-term. For that reason, typically, we
try to control intraocular pressure whenever possible with a combination of medication
and laser treatments. However, in eyes in which we are unable to adequately control the
intraocular pressure, despite our best efforts, surgical options need to be considered.


Question: I have been diagnosed with closed-angle glaucoma in one eye. I had an iridotomy and
take Azopt three times a day and Combigan two times a day. My eye tires very easily
when doing any close-up work and it feels much better if I just cover the bad eye while
working. Is this putting too much strain on my "good" eye? Am I doing any damage to
the eye with glaucoma? Is it OK to wear an eye patch when my eye is tired?
Answer: The eye fatigue that you are noticing could be related to the glaucoma in the eye if you
have lost substantial vision or it could be a side effect of the eye drops or merely normal
aging. It is good that your closed-angle glaucoma has been diagnosed and that you had
an iridotomy in that eye. If you have primary closed-angle glaucoma it is also important
to have your other eye evaluated and perhaps it has already had an iridotomy which can
be preventative for angle-closure in the future.
You are not putting strain or causing any harm to your "good" eye by using it nor will this
affect the glaucoma in your other eye. If the eye feels better by covering it or shutting the
eye that will not do any harm. I urge you discuss these issues with your ophthalmologist
and also be sure that your pressure is well controlled and there are no other problems
with your eyes.


Question: I have "end-stage open angle glaucoma" and wondered what the term "6 degree tunnel
OU" means.
Answer: Visual field tests measure how wide your field of vision is. In other words, to what extent
can you see things beyond what is right in front of you in your central vision. Degree
measurements begin at the center crosshairs when taking the test, and the
measurements get larger the farther from center that you can see. A six degree tunnel
indicates that you have a tunnel of vision six degrees wide. People with ten degree
visual fields are described as legally blind.


Question: Can Pred Forte usage elevate intraocular pressure (IOP)? Also, how long after stopping
Pred Forte will the IOP drop back to normal?
Answer: Pred Forte (prednisolone acetate 1%) and other steroids (whether topical, inhaled, oral,
intravenous, or injected) can elevate IOP. This is more likely to happen in patients who
are predisposed to developing glaucoma. Usually, the pressure-elevating effect of a
steroid will wane after a few weeks, but occasionally, we can see the effect persist for
months.


Question: I'm experiencing nausea 10 days after my cataract surgery. I have moderate glaucoma
for which I am taking azopt three times a day besides the post-operative drops of
vigamox, prednisolone and ketorolac. Is my nausea due to any of my medications?
Answer: It is unlikely that the drops are causing nausea, but it is very important to determine that
your eye pressure is not too high. If it has been 10 days or more since surgery, and if
your eye feels fine, I would stop the vigamox drops.


Question: Is it normal for your eye to be red after laser surgery to lower the pressure in your eye?
Answer: It is not unusual for an eye to be red for several days following laser trabeculoplasty. Let
your ophthalmologist know if the redness persists, or if you develop blurred vision, pain,
or progressive light sensitivity.


Question: My 61 year old husband is almost blind from diabetes related glaucoma. Are there any
surgical treatments available to return his vision?
Answer: Vision loss from glaucoma is irreversible unfortunately. However, it is important that your
husband or any individual with diabetes and glaucoma maintain regular complete eye
care. It may be that glasses, cataract surgery, treatment for diabetic macular edema or
bleeding may be necessary which may improve the vision.


Question: I was reading your website on everything having to do with glaucoma. I just had
trabeculectomy surgery on Tuesday in my right eye only. My question to you is that since
I am stuck at home recovering and being extremely careful, would it be harmful to smoke
marijuana? I know it doesn't cure glaucoma, but just to relax and take it easy? I have
tried finding articles on using it after the surgery just to relax and haven't found any
answers. If you could please email me back so that I know whether or not it will ruin the
healing process, I would really appreciate it.
Answer: Any recovery from eye surgery can be complex. Recovery from glaucoma filtering
surgery can be especially complicated depending upon many factors relating to the
stage and type of the glaucoma that you have, the medical and other treatments
performed before surgery, the nature of the surgery, as well as how your eye heals
following surgery. Cannabinoid containing compounds, such as marijuana, have been
reported in some individuals to lower the eye pressure and have been used as a
treatment for glaucoma. Unfortunately, in most of these studies the pressure reduction
was relatively short term, and more and more marijuana is required over time in order to
achieve the same effect. Smoking marijuana can also damage the lungs, similar to what
can occur with cigarettes.
While the mechanism by which marijuana lowers the eye pressure is not fully
understood, it appears to work by reducing the amount of fluid that is made in the eye.
Following glaucoma surgery, it is important for the eye to make fluid normally in order to
heal properly. Use of marijuana could potentially, therefore, interfere with appropriate
healing and increase the risk of the surgery failing. You should talk with your
ophthalmologist before taking anything that could affect your eyes following surgery.

Question: I have glaucoma and am being treated with prostaglandin eyedrops after having had laser
iridotomy in each eye. Can I continue being a platelet donor as I have been for the last few
years?
Answer: I know of no problem with prostaglandin drops and platelet donation. You should,
however, always notify the blood bank of all medications you are taking including drops.

Question: How do eye drops relieve pressure when you have glaucoma
Answer: Different drops have different mechanisms. Some eye drops work to diminish the
amount of fluid the eye produces. Others work to enhance the amount of fluid that drains
out of the eye.